---
layout: page
title: Motivation
description: >
  Step 1 of the pipeline is motivation. Why are you doing this data science?
hide_description: true
sitemap: false
---

It may seem trivial, but the first thing you need to figure out before starting a project is what
the general goal is. Why are you doing science on this data? What are you hoping to find, and what
could the potential benefits of your results be? What, if any, similar work has been done already,
and how can you incorporate and build off of their results?

## The Goal

I want to analyze game replay files generated by Rocket League to see what qualities of play or
techniques/mechanics are most effective on the field in each rank. Specifically, I want to separate
the data into two parts: *gamesense* and *mechanics*. For both of these aspects of gameplay, I
want to identify specific patterns across different ranks that indicate what qualities are most
helpful at each skill level for ranking up. In case you are unfamiliar with Rocket League or the
aspects of its gameplay, check out the About section for information about [the game][TG00] or
[positioning and mechanics][TG01].

## The Benefit

Many players are constantly wondering, *what is the best way to rank up?* In a game in which you
have full, 3-dimensional control of your vehicle, the skill ceiling is infinite. How, then, do you
pick what to work on next? In this project I hope to identify specific mechanics or aspects of
gamesense/positioning that are leading to the most goals being scored. The idea behind this is to
give players a sense of what players at their rank are doing that is giving them the edge up on the
other team, thus allowing them to rank up. Different things may be important at different ranks, so
I hope to be able to provide some sort of insight to players of all skill levels. I am also hoping
to gauge the relative importance of gamesense vs. mechanics. Providing concrete evidence of the
impact these aspects of gameplay have on inprovement can give players an idea of the direction in
which to take their training, and perhaps settle the almost seven year old debate of mechanics vs.
gamesense.

## Previous Work

Tim Smithies, Mark Campbell, Niall Ramsbottom & Adam Toth published a [paper][PW00] in September
2021 with a goal very similar to mine. They selected metrics of players' positioning in competitive
1v1s, and used a Random Forest model to identify which metrics had the most predictive power in
determining the players' rank and the outcome of the match. There are a few key differences between
the methods of this paper and what I will be doing:
- Smithies et al. analyzed 1v1 matches, and I will be using 2v2 matches. The playstyle and pace of
gameplay is generally regarded to be significantly different when comparing 1v1 and 2v2 matches,
and I anticipate the possibility of identifying different metrics to be more important to this
playlist. Also, the metrics I am using will also include interactions between teammates, which is
not a factor in 1v1 matches. Being aware of your teammate and positioning to both execute and
receive passes is a huge part of gamesense, so I anticipate finding significant trends there that
were not present in the paper.
- Smithies et al. used matches from 2020, before the game went free-to-play. The matches I will be
examining are from free-to-play Season 5, in 2022. I do not have any specific predictions, but it
is a possibility that the large influx of new players had an impact on the way the game is played.
- Smithies et al. used games from only four different ranks in an effort to provide more separation
in the data. Since part of my goal is to be able to provide specific insight to players of all
ranks, I will be using subdivisions from all eight ranks. From a players perspective I can say that
there is a clear skill gap between each rank, though I am unsure if this will be as clear in the
data. Regardless, I do not believe any overlap will be enough to completely hide statistically
significant trends.
- Finally, Smithies et al. used only positional metrics in their analysis. Extracting information
about mechanics from the replay files is much more difficult and computationally intensive, and
depending on the method would require a more in-depth knowledge of the game. I will be attempting
to identify as many mechanical metrics as I see feasible, which will give me an entirely new angle
on the data. Unfortunately, due to the increased computational demands of extracting mechanical
metrics, I will only be analyzing about 7,000 replays (compared to about 34,000 in the paper).

Continue with [Data Collection](data_collection.md){:.heading.flip-title}
{:.read-more}

[TG00]: /about/#about-the-game
[TG01]: /about/#gameplay

[PW00]: /about/#previous-work